Bob Collins, who served as a member of the SEAL
Squad in Vietnam from the years 1971 to 1974. Okay,
Mr. Collins, you served in Vietnam from 1971 until
1974. Can you tell me why you volunteered and what
influences initiated you to volunteer?
Well, I think Part of the main reason is my
grandfather was in the Navy and my father was in the
Navy. I had several uncles that were in the Navy.
That's why I went Navy.
The draft really didn't come into play. I had
volunteered a year before I even graduated from
high school, so that didn't have any influence.
With all of what was going on in Vietnam,
I guess the fear of living under a communistic rule
was the
biggest fear. When you're in high school, most of
the time you don't think about those things. But
Vietnam was becoming real
relevant to us, the guys that were in high school.
And we started thinking about it.
I just didn't feel like living, even hearing and
reading what I had read about communism, I didn't
feel like living under that setting and whatever I
felt like that I could do to combat that was...
Okay. There were a lot of protests going on during
that time also around 1970. How did you regard the
protests? Well, when I was... I really didn't pay
any attention to them until I got to Vietnam. And we
would read about them in Stars and Stripes, from
letters that we got from home about how this... And
mainly it was college students on the campuses
rioting and protesting for our benefit. And I... a
lot of us had the attitude is how could they know
without being there and knowing what our thoughts
and our feelings were how could they sit over here
on a college campus and riot for something that
they knew nothing about you know we felt like you
know coming back and knocking a few heads trying to
get them to understand that we were there fighting
for them so that they could be free to do what they
were doing you know if it wasn't for the guys that
have fought in all the wars, we would probably be
under a socialist-type government or a
communistic government. And they wouldn't have
the freedom to do that. But yet, they were over here
rioting
against the liberties that we were trying to
supply them with or to keep them with. It made us
mad. From the time you volunteered until the day
you arrived in Vietnam, describe to me what type of
training or education you received about the
Vietnamese people, their religion, their
country in general, and just basically what
training you received, military, etc. Well,
that's where I really came to an appreciation of
the Navy is you sit through... daytime classes. I
mean, you go through eight hours over the class a
day in
the classroom setting. And then you do, or we had to
go through jungle tactic training, where it got us
used to fighting in jungle. Where was that
training held? In San Diego. Well, along the coast
of San Diego and Mexico. We used to have to,
every morning you go out and your CO is out there.
And there's a raft that weighs about 300 pounds.
And so you have to put it up on your shoulders and
carry it down to the beach. But it's weird as he's
sitting in it. And he's yelling at you and
screaming at you. But everything that they did,
you know, they were real tough.
But because of their toughness, it helped keep us
alive. Well, what I was asking you earlier also is,
did you receive any type of education about the
Vietnamese people or their religion or anything?
Did you know anything about it before you got
there? Not really. That was not our job. That was
for the diplomats. Our job was to be an aggressor
and get a job done. We weren't there to try to
further relations with the North Vietnamese
people. We were there to do a job. whether it was to
blow up a bridge or whether it was to get secret
documents or to kidnap or to assassinate. We were
there to do a job and it was not a diplomatic job. It
was a military job. Okay. Can you describe for me a
little bit about what a SEAL is and what it took to
become one, how your team worked and what your role
was as a member of that team? Well, I was, the SEALs
are, I would say the most unique fighting group in
the world. There's an aggressor squad with the
British, I understand now. They have an aggressor
company that are basically about the same as the
SEALs. The SEALs are the frogmen. I don't know if
you've ever seen any movies about the frogmen and
what they did. or do in military operations, but we
worked in four-man teams, and each individual had
a job to do.
This is the way it was set up with our team. I was a
protector. I was there to, or we all really Like
when you hit the beach, each man turns his back
toward the other one. So you have a perimeter. You
got each man looking out. And you go in like that.
And you're each protecting each other. But in the
setting of explosives or setting a perimeter
watch, that's where I was called a protector. And I
would make sure that the rest of the team was able to
get away with whatever we were sent to do. What
about the other members? What were their jobs?
Well, you have an explosives man. If you're going
in to blow up a bridge, you have a setter, which
would set the explosives, and then a timer. This
guy would go and set timers.
What was the fourth man? Like, I would stay on the
outer perimeter, and the other guy would stay on
the inside. If I got wiped out, well, then there
would still be one more man to protect it. The main
objective was just do the mission, get the mission
accomplished. And if it was, they would have to go
through two of us to
take out the explosives men. So it was a lot of what A
lot of the real detailed stuff,
it would take probably hours to tell you what
exactly we did and how we did it. Even on a mission
where we would have to go in and take someone
prisoner, a high ranking officer or whatever, Our
training was a lot more extensive than any other
area, because we went on missions in North Vietnam
only. We didn't go to South Vietnam.
So the training,
I I guess I would go through it again if I had to. It's
not something that I would just like to do every
day, though, because it was pretty rough.
Describe for me what a usual day would be like.
Well, it all depends on the day.
Normally, Are you talking about basic training,
or are you talking about in Vietnam? In Vietnam. In
Vietnam.
It's a 24-hour day. When we go on a mission, you
don't sleep.
You don't rest until your mission's
accomplished. I remember one
mission that we went on lasted about 36 hours. That
was a normal day. So you really can't set it in a
setting of a day. This is what my daily work was.
Because each thing that we were set to do was so
individualistic. It was in a setting of its own.
Whether it was to go into the hardest The hardest
one was the assassinations, when we were sent in to
eliminate one person in particular. Such as?
Well, there was a...
I wish I could remember his name.
I can't remember his name. Probably good that I
can't remember his name. There was a colonel that
was
in charge
of tactical in the North Vietnam.
I can't remember if it was a tank.
We were sent in to get this guy. He was a North
Vietnamese guy? Yeah. That's all. That's all that
we dealt with was North Vietnamese.
The only time I saw South Vietnamese
was when I was in the hospital. That's the only time
I saw South Vietnamese. But the planning of trying
to get to one person, especially when they're so
well protected, Because these guys were really
well protected.
Sometimes it would take days for us to... We'd have
to burrow in sometimes and stay for 24, 48 hours in a
hole somewhere just waiting to have the
opportunity. Because we had to go in not only with
the idea of getting this guy, but with the idea of
getting out. And it was not a suicide mission for
us. because we wanted to stay alive too. But the
objective was to get this guy and to get out alive.
So sometimes it would take four days to get to
somebody that we were sent at. What else was a
normal day
besides assassinations?
Stealing documents.
I guess the easiest things to do was to blow things
up. Such as? Well, a bridge across a river where
they're transporting
weapons or food or whatever to their front lines.
No.
Basically,
Got to understand that the
North Vietnamese were probably the best jungle
fighters ever, ever, ever. And so they could
construct a bridge in 12 hours. We could blow it up
at night when they were transporting stuff. And by
the next evening, it would be right back up again.
And a lot of times it was just made out of heavy
bamboo. But it was made well enough. We have CVs,
construction builders, in our services. But
these guys could just go through the jungle and
construct bridges made out of bamboo better than
some of our steel bridges. You could drive tanks
across them.
So it was always a constant. blow this up, blow that
up, get rid of this. We could stop their supply line
for just a small amount of time, it was good. Did you
take prisoners very often? Only the ones we were
sent to get. You took a prisoner or shot them? Who?
The people we were after? Yeah.
If we were sent to get them, we never lost anybody we
were sent in to get. If we were sent to take them
prisoner, we took them prisoner. If we were sent to
kill them, then we did. If we look at our losses in
Vietnam, the 55,000 men, that's
not even close to the price that the North
Vietnamese paid. And I think that's what
gets to me the most is we cry over the 55,000 men.
But the idea, the whole, I don't know, the whole
American idea seemed to have been lost. We just
stopped wanting to win and to stop them. And
eventually, they won out. And that is the most
degrading thing of all. When we went in, we should
have gone in to get the job done. In World War II,
when they were going in to free Paris or Rome or to
really go into Germany itself,
Their attitude, their idea in the American people
was to stamp out the aggressiveness of Hitler. And
we as an American people have just seemed to have
lost that. We don't have that idea anymore. What
sort of losses did your SEAL team take? Well, of all
the time I was there, We lost one man
for hearing problems. And we lost one CO, a
commanding officer. And we lost one other all the
time that I was there. Two of them were killed and
one of them was sent home? Mm-hmm. OK. How much did
your training help in your actual performance of
duty?
Kept me alive more than once. If it hadn't been, I
think if it hadn't been for the training, I ran into
a booby trap one time. And if it hadn't been for the
training, I probably would have been
The whole idea behind booby traps in Vietnam was
not to kill you. It was just to maim you. And I hit one
that was supposed to come up into my face. It was
bamboo strips. And
because of the alertness and the quickness that
you learn in training, I was able to protect
myself. I had 408 stitches in my arms where the
bamboo cut into my arms instead of into my face.
That's one example.
It got to where, after a while, if we didn't,
not that killing is something that you like to do,
But that was our job. And the training that we went
through, we were supposed to be, we were there to
kill the enemy. What time of day was the most active
for y'all? Oh, nighttime. Always nighttime. How
would you describe the Vietnam spiders?
I mean, the Viet Cong spiders. Very good.
Excellent. As far as jungle fighting, open
fighting, I don't think they would probably be as
good as the American. But as far as jungle
fighting, probably just as good as the Japanese in
World War II, if not better. Who did you receive
your orders from? And by that I mean, where did they
originate from? Sink Pack Fleet. And who's
commander of that?
Maybe many. Admiral?
Station in Hawaii?
I don't know.
I can't remember the guys. I'm real bad on names.
He was commander of what again? What was it? The
Pacific Fleet. Okay. What is your opinion about
careerism in the military during Vietnam? Did it
exist in your opinion? And by that I mean the
commanding officers being there just as kind of a
plus on their record. I
don't think we had, I don't think that the guys that
went over there, you mean as young officers
wanting to make a career? I mean, up to generals and
stuff like that. The records that I've seen, at
least in the Marines and stuff, were that there
were only like three generals killed and two of
them were in accidents. And so, I mean, it was
mainly, you know, the GIs that were up there
fighting, doing the fighting, and the generals
were, you know, off somewhere in a secure place.
Well, that's as in all wars. You know, how many
generals were killed in World War II? On World War
I,
the general is not there to get out and pull the
trigger. It's just like the idea of a manager
somewhere. It's not what he can do. It's what he can
get others to do for him.
So I have absolutely no problem with the number of
high-ranking officers that were killed because
that's not their job. Their job is to think, and our
job was the job to, you know. Did you respect your
leaders? I did, yes. Okay. Tell me about the role
the Russians played in the war, based on what you
saw.
Well, we went very far north, and I guess contrary
to popular belief that, you know,
The
North Vietnamese were actually fighting two
fronts. They were fighting aggression from the
Chinese on one front. And that's only because the
North Vietnamese,
which was stupid, they became aggressive to the
Chinese. And the Chinese weren't going to put up
with that.
and then against the American in the
South Vietnamese. On the other front, the
Russians not only supplies, I never saw actual
troops flooding in, but they did have military
advisors. Advisors in the north? Oh, yeah,
training. you know, in weaponry. And just like we
do when we go in somewhere, just like it started in
Vietnam with us, you know, we sent in military
advisors.
Of course, the Russians never had to pull troops
into Vietnam as we did because they had the
advantage.
They knew what they were fighting for. They were
fighting to take over South Vietnam and make
Vietnam a communistic-run country, and they kept
that idea. We went in with the idea of freeing
Vietnam, and we lost it somewhere. The Russians,
as far as instilling into the minds of the people,
they did a real good job. You had told me that you
killed a Russian advisor. That was the highlight
of your time there. Tell me about that. Well, we
went in just to get some documents, some maps,
We got a lot of our information on transportation
routes, troop movements,
mine areas, from what we could steal from the Viet
Cong.
And
we just went in to get some information
military advisor was there, and he just happened
to wake up at the wrong time. So it was, and it's not
the idea of killing a Russian. I guess I really
wanted to kill an idea.
Because to me that they represent
communism and socialism to the fullest extent.
And if I could do anything to smash that idea, I was
that much more ahead. That was probably the
highlight of my Vietnam experience anyway. I
can't say that it was fun. Taking the life of
another human being is not fun. But it sure made it a
lot easier knowing who he was.
Tell me about the day that you were wounded.
It
was a mistake on our part because
we went in to observe
a lot of troop movement and we never Got into open
area. And I don't know how it happened that day, but
we were walking right out in the middle of a rice
field. And, I mean, snipers were always, I mean,
always killing our guys. Not the SEALs, but
American troops. I mean, the snipers were real,
real good at what they did. And we probably lost
more lives from snipers than anything else. from
bombs or fire fights or anything. Snipers
probably kills most of our men. But
all of a sudden we heard shots fired and the CO went
down.
And we just started firing everywhere. I
did a stupid thing as I went to I went to get Garcia.
And
when I was about halfway to him, we heard shots
again. And I was running. And I got hit in the leg, in
the ankle first, and then the leg. And he just kept
firing. The other guys got his location, and we
called out to a ship that was out in the harbor. And
he fired in and blew the tree that this sniper was
in. Just blew it with a five-inch gun. Just blew it
all. It went up in a pile of smoke. But by that time, I
had already been pretty much wasted by then. They
got me out. The CO had been shot in the head. He was
dead. But they got me out. Where else did you have
wounds? Besides your leg, anyone? Stomach,
shoulder, and arm. And what happened to the guy
that was shooting you? Well, I'm sure he's dead.
They found pieces of the arm. The other guy found
just the pieces of the rifle that he was using, an
AK-47, which is a real well-made Russian weapon.
And
we reconstructed it and dedicated it to the ship
that fired the round. So they hung it up in their
galley in a glass case.
Tell me about the day that you were captured. Oh,
that was a joke. We got information that we were
supposed to go in and, again, just make
observations and see who was there, how many, the
strength of the Viet Cong. We went in and found out
it was American Fifth Army was in there. So we just
walked in. Well, they thought we were, you have to
understand, I understand their motives for
taking us prisoners. They thought we were spies.
Because we don't carry any, SEALs don't carry any
ID. You know, they're going in.
What sort of uniform did you wear? Normally a black
turtleneck sweater with black gabardine pants
and jungle boots and as many explosives and
weapons as we could. Why didn't they recognize you
as Americans? Well, there are no markings or
anything. You don't have any kind of markings on
you at all as to manufacturer or anything. So as far
as they knew, what had happened is in between the
time when we got our orders to go in, the North Viet
Cong had backed off. And Fifth Army had moved in to
the position where the Viet Cong were supposed to
have been. So when we went in there, you know, we
just found the Fifth Army and walked in and we could
have, you know, been spies or... Russian spies.
Russians. Or just about anybody. So I understand.
How long were you held and what did it take to get you
released? Well, it got a little aggravating.
After 10 days, we became pretty upset. They
treated us real well. They kept joking around
about sending us over to the Koreans. The Koreans
are probably the best people to get information
out of prisoners of war.
Finally,
the admiral that was aboard, I can't remember
which carrier it was, one of the carriers that was
there, admiral that was aboard that carrier, had
to come in in ideas to get us out. It took 10 days?
Actually, it was like 15 days in total. But they
treated us well. They fed us real good.
It was mainly the heckling. They were giving us a
hard time.
They sincerely believed that you were Russians?
I'm not sure. They had some wacko officers in
there. You've got to understand the Army.
I don't know if they... thought it was a joke. To us,
it wasn't a very good joke because we still had a job
to do. If they would have really been sincere about
turning us over to the Koreans,
there probably would have been a few of them taken
out in the attempt.
Okay, tell me some more about some other
operations you went on.
Any other incidents like that? Did you ever come
close to getting captured by the North
Vietnamese? Oh, no. No.
It may sound funny, but you need to understand that
that when you're in a fighting group like this,
that you're just kind of like a machine, you know.
We had gone up against 30, 40 at a time here in Conk,
and it
was killing. You know, so the...
The odds were always in our favor. They were real
sneaky in jungle maneuvers, but so were we. Over
the regular GI Joe that goes in,
they had the advantage.
The Army, the Marine Corps,
did not really train enough in jungle. And we still
don't train today enough in jungle warfare. If we
get into a conflict in Central America, our men are
still going to be not equipped in jungle warfare.
And we do not spend enough time. We're so ancient.
You send a guy in with 100 pounds on his back, a
shovel and a pick and all this junk on his back that
is useless in jungle warfare. You can't do that to a
man. You take a North Vietnamese capture,
which was rare, because they'd just rather die
than be captured. But the ones that were captured,
they'd have just a handful of rice and just as many
weapons as they could carry. We'd load our guys
down in jungle warfare. You can't do that. We're
just behind the times.
We started blowing our troops out around 1972, and
you stayed until 74. Why was that? Well,
I remember like in 1970, 1972,
we mined Haiphong Harbor, President Nixon did, to
cut off supplies to the North Vietnamese, the
ships that were going in. So
militarily, we were still, just because we
started pulling out a few troops, there were
always troops coming back and forth. And I'm
not going to say it was a hype put over by the press or
even the White House, but we were pretty much still
at full strength over there. We weren't in full
enough strength to get the job done.
Did you receive any medals when you were in
Vietnam?
Yeah. Yeah, I got a few. How do you view them?
I'm very, well, I'll put it this way. I'm very proud
of the uniform that I wore and it doesn't bother me a
bit to put it on in Veterans Day and Memorial Day.
The medals that are on it are to me just a
recognition of a job well done.
They might be given by the military. I have a
presidential citation that I got from President
Nixon. But
I'm proud of him. I did the best that I could do to
stamp out what I hate the most. If our government
wants to give me a medal to pin on my chest because of
it, then I'll accept that.
Why do you think we lost the war in Vietnam? If you
were to place the blame on somebody, who would you
place it on? The American public.
I think the attitude of the American public
lost the war in Vietnam. Did you feel we were
justified in going over there in the first place?
Definitely. I think any time a government asks us
to come in because they feel a threat of communism
in their back door,
it justifies it.
Any other reasons why you thought we lost the war?
Anything to do with the military tactics you used?
failures in command or anything?
Did you feel like the South Vietnamese people had a
real desire to fight the North Vietnamese? Oh,
definitely. They still do. There's still a war
going on in Vietnam.
The majority, I think the majority of the South
Vietnamese that I came in contact with just a few
that I did, but you can talk to them. I went to
Washington D.C.
two years ago and there was a big delegation of
South Vietnamese people there.
They were having a big rally there to
anti-establishment, anti-involvement in
Central America. And they were comparing our
involvement in Central America to our
involvement in Vietnam, which is unfair. And
there were a lot of Vietnamese people there that as
military, they They didn't have anything to do
with the people that were protesting against our
involvement because they appreciated what we did
for them. And it was a sincere appreciation of what
we were there for. They couldn't do it on their own.
They asked us for help. We went in and helped them as
much as we could. The attitude of the American
people, especially when it gets back to the GI, the
guy that's fighting, you know, And I have to
compare it to World War II, because what else do we
have to compare it with?
How do you think it would have went over if
everything that the guys over there were fighting
about,
if everything that they heard was negative, that
they were dogs and they were pigs and they were baby
killers? We had no business there. No, the
American people in World War II backed what we were
doing because of the aggression of Hitler. Hitler
was not communist, but the idea of his aggression
is what we were trying to stamp out, taking over
other people's.
I think it was the letdown, you know, when you get
bombarded and that's all you hear is how the
American people dislike what you're doing. It
gives you a real insecure sense, you know,
feeling. And that's what we got when we were in
Vietnam was, you know, college students
protesting.
guys going on military trial for doing a job that
they were sent to do.
It was real hard to come back to the United States
with a sense of job well done. I mean, nobody
has ever said thank you for protecting my
liberties.
Continued on side two.